Trading is basic math, and if you don't
understand these four essential
concepts, no matter what strategy you
use or how good your setups are, you
will never become a profitable trader.
But once you understand them, you'll
realize why most traders never become
profitable, even when they're learning
the right strategy. In this video, I'll
show you the four mathematical concepts
of winning in trading, plus one simple
question that will change your trading
forever. Let's start. So I want to start
with these five sentences, and these are
going to actually change the way you see
trading. First one is most traders, and
most of you actually chase perfect
entries, but the real edge comes from
probabilities and math. Individual wins
and losses are basically coin flips, so
it's a 50/50 for each trade, and
long-term success is decided by your
system math, and that's going to be the
focus of the video, and one trade means
nothing. I want you to look at the chart
here, and this is probably where most of
your attention goes. The strategy, 40%,
indicators, psychology, risk. Meanwhile,
expectancy gets almost no attention, but
it's the number that tells you whether
the system actually makes money. That is
the problem. It's not a lack of effort,
but it's a misdirection of effort, and
that's why people spend years in
trading, but still stay stuck, because
they're focusing on the wrong thing. So
let's start with expectancy, what
actually makes money. Now expectancy is
the only number that matters, and it's
not how your last trade wins, not how
clean your last five setups were, and
not how confident you felt. Expectancy
is simply the average profit you can
expect per trade, and the formula goes
like this: the win rate times the
average win, minus the loss rate times
the average loss. For example, an 8R
system at 15% win rate sounds very bad,
right? You're losing 85% of your trades,
but using the math and using the
formula, we can see that it can give you
a positive 350 per trade. And since the
math is positive, it means that you'll
be profitable while losing nearly nine
out of every 10 trades. Now, look at the
three R system. 55% win rate at a three
R, using the math is going to give you
this, 1,200 per trade. That is positive.
Now, looking at the one R at 70% win
rate, using the math is going to give
you 400 per trade. So, if you can see
that 70% and 15% almost give you kind of
the same expectancy. So, it's not about
the win rate itself, and it's not about
the R multiple itself. It's the
combination of the two that creates the
edge. Now, why? Why expectancy matters
this much? Because it takes your entire
strategy into one clear number. And
instead of saying, "I think this works."
you can say, "This system makes X per
trade over a large sample." That is the
difference. So, simply, if the
expectancy is positive, I mean, you have
a profitable system. Now, there is one
thing that most of you forget about.
Your expectancy on paper is not your
real expectancy because every trade has
cost. So, spread, commission, slippage,
all of that cuts into the result. So, a
strategy can look profitable on paper
and still lose money in reality because
you're not taking these into account.
Now, let's look at this graph here
because this is where most of you
actually give up, or maybe get fooled.
For the first maybe 10 or 20 trades,
you're not seeing much results, so
you're not or you cannot say if this
system is good or bad. Only after when
we have a large sample, the truth
appears. So, right here, you cannot say
if you have a profitable system or not.
Sometimes it's going to go like this and
go up and a lot of noise, but I'm having
here a perfect scenario. But only after
a large sample, the expectancy appears.
And now, after maybe 100 trade, you can
for sure say that, "Okay, this is
unprofitable system and this is
profitable." You might be walking away
from a perfectly good edge. So, maybe
it's going to start like this, but then
go up and it's going to be profitable.
You just quit before it start revealing
itself. And I want you to remember this
because that's going to connect directly
to variance, which we're going to be
covering later. So, now the question
becomes, how do you actually build a
profitable system? The answer is a
trade-off. One that most traders never
fully accept. There is no perfect
strategy. Every system comes with a
trade-off. Higher reward usually means
lower win rate, and higher win rate
usually means smaller reward. That is
the reality of trading. And this is
where many traders get stuck because
they keep looking for a system that
gives them both. It does not exist. Now,
based on the chart, we can see the
expectancy per trade for different
system. This system has an 8R and 50%
win rate, and we're going to be covering
the uh relationship between the two.
This has a 6R and 30% win rate. So, if
you notice, these are very close to each
other. This is a 6R 30%, this is a 3R
55%, and even there is a big difference
when it comes to the win rate, but
they're very close when it comes to the
expectancy. And even a 15% win rate and
a 70% win rate are also very close to
each other. Now, look at the chart here.
This is the reward to risk here and the
win rate here. As the target gets
bigger, the win rate drops. And that's
not because you're doing something
wrong, but because that's how the market
work. The further price has to travel,
the less often it gets there. Now, the
sweet spot would be somewhere in here,
on the middle. You don't want to go
really here or a 1R and 70%. You want to
be in the middle. So, coming back to the
sweet spot again, and that's where the
math and reality meet. It's not the most
exciting strategy, not the most
impressive back test, but the one you
can actually execute over hundreds of
trades, and that's what you're looking
for. So, if we notice here, the sweet
spot would be somewhere in the middle
here. I mean, if you can be very close
to the dark spot or the dark color,
that's going to be the best one, but
that's not realistic. But, the sweet
spot is to be in the middle and very
close to the dark color. You could be
having a 40% win rate and maybe a 4R,
that's going to be good. 50% win rate,
3R, 4R, that is good. Improvement in
trading would be going to the right top,
increasing the win rate and the reward
to risk, but you should be realistic.
And I want to tell you that you do not
need to win as often as you think. And
this is the breakeven formula, so you
can actually apply this to your R. So,
if you're focusing you on 5R, you apply
this and you get definite result. So,
applying the formula, if your target is
one reward to risk, then you need 50% to
break even and above 50% to win. But, at
4R, you only need above 20% to win. So,
think about that. You can be actually
wrong most of the time, 80% of the time,
and still not lose money. Variance. Why
traders emotionally fail. Now, this is
where many traders emotionally fall
apart even when they're doing everything
right. So, variance actually change a
lot about you. Now, look at these three
curves. These are based on the same
system, same rules, and same expectancy,
but completely different experiences.
One gets a smooth ride to the upside,
one gets a brutal drawdown, and one
lands somewhere in between. Now, imagine
that you are the trader in the drawdown.
You'll be questioning everything and
you'll be looking for a new strategy,
wondering if the edge stopped working.
Meanwhile, someone else is trading the
exact same system and having different
results and winning from the beginning.
That's what the is. And this is one of
the hardest truth in trading. You can
basically do everything right and still
lose. So, you get the right entry, the
right stop, the right target, and you
execute your trading plan, and still
lose seven trades in a row. Now, simply
variance means that short-term results
are not everything. They don't tell you
everything. You can also break every
rule and win five trades in a row, and
that is very dangerous. And short-term
results outcome prove nothing. Only a
large sample tell the truth, and that
also applies to expectancy. We know that
one trade means nothing, and also a
small sample means nothing. Now, a lot
of time, your [clears throat] mind will
start playing games, and it's going to
trick you. So, I'll be having one loss,
maybe two losses, three losses, and when
you have four losses in a row, you would
think that now the next one would have a
much higher probability to win, and
you'll be saying to yourself and
thinking, "Okay, the next one has to win
because now I'm having four losses in a
row." So, you increase your size, you
take more risk, you go more aggressive,
and then it's a loser again. What we
need to understand from this, and that
is what gambler's fallacy is, that every
trade is still independent. Even if you
lose five trades before it, the next
trade is still a 50/50. It's a coin flip
again. So, I want you to be careful. It
does not matter how much losses you have
taken in the past, the percentage of win
rate for every trade is still 50% and
not after four losses it goes to 82% or
91% after five losses. No, it still stay
the same as 50%. Now, we get to a risk
because none of the math we've covered
matters if you don't survive long enough
for the edge to play out. Position
sizing is where discipline becomes
visible. So, every trade has a different
stop loss size. Every risk in dollars
must stay the same. Bigger stop losses
mean smaller position size, and smaller
size equal larger position size. So,
from this, that means the dollar risk or
the percentage stay the same while
everything can change, and we need to
adjust accordingly. Now, why your risk
per trade matters so much? Because if
you're risking too much, even a normal
losing streak becomes dangerous. If
you're risking small enough, you give
your edge room to breathe. So, what I
suggest is go from 0.25%
to 2% risk per trade. That is the
maximum and a one bad week or bad month
will not just destroy everything. So,
what you can do is, and that is what I'm
the most important part of this video,
is position sizing. So, use a position
size calculator. You could be using
this, and that's the link. So, you go
and have the account currency, the
account balance, the risk percentage.
So, you have $100 in your account, you
put 100 or 1,000, your risk percentage
0.5%, and then your currency pair. So,
I'm trading Euro dollar, and then the
stop loss size is 25 pips. You press
calculate, and that's what you get. So,
you're basically risking $5 of your
account, and then you come here to the
standard lot, and that's what you're
risking. So, you should enter the trade
with 0.02 lot size. Or, you could do one
simply on TradingView. So, you have this
indicator called lot size calculator.
You simply apply this and adjust
accordingly, and it's going to show you
everything. So, you adjust the settings,
and it's going to give you the lot size
here. That is what you're going to be
risking. Now, even the worst losing
streak is temporary if you have a valid
system. So, a losing streak is not a
problem, but your position size is. If
you can control your risk, a losing
streak hurts. So, if you can notice, it
hurts, and you have some drawdown here,
but you can still survive this. But, if
you're risking too much here, you'd lose
everything. So, calculating the risk in
order for this drawdown, if it happens,
you don't lose all your money, but you
can still recover and then have a
profitable system after that. Now, risk
of reward. let's look at these numbers
here. The higher the risk, so this is
what you're risking here, 0.5, 1, 2, and
5%. The higher the risk, the faster the
probability of ruin explodes. So, here,
that's the probability of 50% drawdown.
Notice how it explode to the upside
aggressively. So, notice the difference
between 1%, 18, and 65%. This is not an
opinion and not psychology, but this is
basic math. And if you understand this,
you understand survival, which is the
foundation of everything in trading.
Now, losses and gains are not equal. In
this case, the math works against you.
So, a 10% loss need 11% to recover, and
it's not only 10%, but as the loss gets
bigger, then you need more to recover.
For example, 30% loss need 43% to
recover, 50% loss need 100% to recover.
Let me think about that. The moment you
lose half of your account, the market
now expects you to double it just to get
back to zero. That's huge. And that's
why protecting your capital matters so
much. So, after everything we covered,
all of the concepts, I know you
understand them. The question becomes
simple, what changes now? What to do?
And I want you to be honest with
yourself here. Now, math could be one of
the problems, psychology could be one of
the problems, but in this video, we're
going to be focusing on psychology, but
you can take this question and apply it
also to any aspect of trading. So, what
is the one thing you know you're doing
wrong that if fixed would completely
change your trading? You probably
already know the answer, and if you sit
with it, you would find an answer, and
that answer could change your trading
forever. This could be judging your
system after a few trades, risking too
much to feel something, so you're
actually seeking emotions instead of
trading the market. Is it confusing good
outcomes with good execution? Is it
abandoning your edge when variance
appears? Or is it chasing certainty in a
game of probabilities? It could be one
of these or it could be something
different. So, you have your own answer
and you could actually write it in the
comments for people to get inspired. And
instead, and that's what you can do
regardless of the answer to the
question, you want to think in
probabilities and not outcomes. You want
to judge your edge over a large sample.
That's how you actually allow the math
to work in your favor. You risk small
enough to survive the variance. You
should know that consistency beats
perfection and your job is execution and
not prediction. So, that's it for this
video. I hope that you learned something
new. If you want to learn my trading
strategy, make sure to check out It's
School. The link is in the description.
Leave a comment with whatever question
you're having. Like and subscribe to the
channel. That's it and I'll see you in
the next one.